# Intro, Chapters 1 and 2

## Intro and Chapter 1

* Originally C with classes, extended from C by Bjarne Stroustrup
* Consistently one of the top 5 languages
* Lots of applications
* Distinct parts:
  * C language
  * C preprocessor
  * Classes and objects
  * Templates
  * Standard Template Library - common functionality
* First standard: C++98, followed up with C++03 bugfix
* Then C++11 in 2011, C++14 in 2014 (e.g. lambdas), C++17 in 2017
* This course is C++14, as C++17 not universally supported
* All of this course is designed for CLI execution; can be compiled on Linux, Mac, Windows using XCode, MS VisualC++, etc.
* Xcode uses clang from LLVM project, a modern and complete C++ compiler
* I was able to build and run the C++11 example on Linux and Mac OS easily.
* It looks like Bazel uses the default toolchain on your system without configuration, which makes life easy, but you can override if you want to.

## Chapter 2

Basic syntax and anatomy of a C++ program

* Statement: line, terminated with ;
* Function: larger unit of code, may contain statements and expressions, often designed to be reused.
* Main function: main entrypoint of any program, called by OS when program launches.
* Variable holds value (or values) for later use.  Must be declared before use.
* Single line comment follows //
* /* multi-line comment */
* `int main()`: returns an int.  In this case, exit code. 0 == success.
* `int main(int argc, char **argv)`: count of args, array of strings representing args.  Now optional, originally mandatory.
* Function code included in {}
* Whitespace mostly ignored in C/C++.  Just included for human benefit.
* `std::puts()`: put string to console.
* `std::printf()`: does the same thing.
* `iostream::cout`: ditto.  Many ways to skin a cat.
* `#include <cstdio>`: not a C++ statement, a directive to "preprocessor".  Replaces that line of text with the entire contents of file (C standard I/O library).
* `using namespace std;`: put this file inside the `std` namespace, which is where the standard library lives.

Statements and expressions

* Statement: ends with a semicolon
* Expression: returns a value (even if not used)
* `std::printf()` uses the same %d, %s directives etc. as Go
* Note that `x = 42` (the assignment statement) is also an expression, and implicitly returns x (i.e., with value 42).  So you can e.g. do `int x; printf("Hello %d", x = 42);`.  This is similar to Perl.

Identifiers

* Readable names for things
* Can only consist of [A-Za-z0-9_]: note no `-` or `.`
* May not begin with a numeral or conflict with reserved words/tokens
* Case sensitive
* Non-latin characters are implementation dependent and not portable
* Any length, but only 63 chars are guaranteed to be checked to be uniqueness
* Keep less than 31 long if exported
* `_` begins private identifiers
* `__` system use only
* Use consistent case
* Variables are strongly typed
* Undefined variables are "dangerous" (ooh, spooky!): looks like they throw an error, but still compile OK
* Can declare type and initialize in one step in many circumstances like in other typed languages, e.g. `int i = 42;`
* Usually best to initialize straight away
* Qualifier becomes part of type: e.g. `const int i = 7;`: a "read only variable" that compiler prevents from being overwritten.  Not just an `int`, but a `const int`.

Pointers

* Powerful, useful, common, dangerous
* Recall a Variable is a typed and named location in memory
* `int x = 4; int y = x;` first declares a variable `x` with a value 4, then declares a new variable `y` and copies the value from x into it.  These two variables are completely independent from that point onwards.
* `int *ip;` declares an integer pointer, which is a special type, containing a pointer to an integer existing at a different point in memory.  Note that confusingly the star is on the variable name, not the type name.
* `ip = &x;` points ip to the "address of" x.  Same as in Go.
* Can combine: `int *ip = &x`
* `y = *ip;` dereferences ip, i.e. reads through the pointer, and copies the actual value to y.  Again, same as in Go.
* If you try and print a pointer, you'll get (some representation of) the address in memory.

References

* Similar to a pointer
* `int x = 7; int &y = x` declares an integer reference `y`
* Note that you don't have to dereference a reference (i.e., when reading from it, you don't need to explicitly read through the pointer with `*`)
* There is no syntax for changing a reference: once it's been created it cannot be changed.  If you try and overwrite it, it just overwrites the thing it references!
* Contrast with a pointer, where you can update to point to another value of the same type
* It's almost as if the pointer is a macro, literally interpolated into the code
* You can think of a reference as a constant pointer: it always points to the same value.  The compiler applies the `*` operator for you.

Primitive array

* Sometimes called "C array" because inherited from C
* Fixed size container with common type
* e.g. `int ia[5]; ia[0] = 1;`
* Indexing starts at 0
* Note array type is implicit.  Type definition is `int`, not `[]int` as in Go.
* `*ia = 1;` is equivalent to `ia[0] = 1;` (very common, but confusing syntax)
* Can create pointers to arrays, e.g. `int *ip = ia;`.  No need for "address-of" operator `&` on right-hand side.
* This syntax can become very concise.  e.g., `*ip = 2;` sets the value of the first entry in the array referenced by the pointer to 2.
* Want to step to the next entry in the array?  Use `++ip;` - i.e. increment the pointer.  Then, you can write through the pointer again using `*ip = 3`.  (This seems very hard to read, since you'd have to keep track of which element in the array your pointer is pointing at.)
* Can initialize with literal: `int ia[3] = { 1, 2, 3 };`.  Newer feature in C++, may not be supported by older compilers.
* Primitive array guaranteed to be stored continuously in memory.

Primitive string

* Special case of primitive array
* Often called "C string"
* `char s[] = "String";`
* Equivalent to `char s[] = { 'S', 't', 'r', 'i', 'n', 'g', 0 };` - note null termination
* Can access by index as in any other array
* Can also use a pointer, as we just saw: `for (char *cp = s; *cp; ++cp) { ... }` creates a character pointer at the beginning of the string, continues while the pointer is not null, and increments the pointer one position each loop.
* Notice that the condition makes use of the fact that strings are terminated with a NUL (an int 0), and C++ evaluates 0 to false
* It seems you can just use a `char` type as an int, and it works.  For example, to test if `char c` is NUL, just do `if (c == 0) { ... }`.

Conditionals

* Two forms: both inherited from C
* `if ( ... ) { ... } else if ( ...) { ... } else { ... }`
* Note that booleans are represented as integers; 0 is false, any other value is true
* Editorial: this is not great, because it's going to lead to type confusion.  Why not just have a boolean type?
* Ternary operator: `x > y ? x : y`.  Read as "if... then... else"

The branching conditional (`switch`)

* `switch(x) { case y: ...; break; case z: ...; break; default: ... }`
* Note that you have to break after each case, otherwise it drops through to the next case.  The block (curly brackets) contains all cases, and break exists the block.  Very common beginner mistake.
* If no `default` given, then it simply runs all the way out of the block.
* `case` requires a `const` - cannot be mutable.

While and do

* `while ( ... ) { ... }` - condition tested before execution of each iteration begins
* `break` to break out of the loop, as in other languages
* `continue` to go to next iteration
* `do { ... } while ( ... )` - condition tested after execution completes.  Less common.

For

* Most common: C for-loop.
* Three things in brackets
* Initializer, condition, increment
* `for ( int i = 0; i < 5; ++i ) { ... }`

Range-based for loop

* Supported from C++11 up
* Iterate over elements of a container
* Uses colon, same as TypeScript
* `int arr[] = { 1, 2, 3, 4 }; for (int i : array) { ... }`
* A compile-time feature.  Compiler knows the length of the array, so handles for us.
* Beware iterating over strings: the NUL is still there at the end.
* `for (char c: "string") { ... }` gets s, t, r, ... and then NUL at the end.

Using stdout

* Seen `puts` and `printf` from C already
* Can write to stdout using an object oriented class too
* `#include <iostream>` - part of STL
* `std::cout` overrides bitwise left-shift operator `<<` to mean "send a stream of bytes to stdout"
* `endl` object ends the line
* Can string several things together, and even mix in integers too
* Many people hold that `cout` is more C++ ish, and should be preferred
* The trainer argues it's not used in a properly OO way and overloads an operator in a way which hides its meaning
* If building static binaries, including `iostream` pulls in ~2 MB of code
